First product spec (#1)
votingworks/vxmail: docs/product-spec.md

necessary adjustments. Many of those counties are lightly staffed, and
many have a completely manual process for processing absentee ballot
requests, stuffing and mailing ballots out, and finally receiving,
sorting, verifying, extracting, and scanning the returned ballots. A
manual process that works for a few hundred ballots quickly falls over
for a few thousand ballots, and establishing a more automated process
in the 6 months we have left is a huge challenge for each small county
to undertake.

We propose VxMail, a set of tools to help small counties quickly scale
up their vote-by-mail capacity.

## Key Hypothesis

A number of small and some medium-sized counties have a sufficiently
manual process for a relatively small number of vote-by-mail ballots
today. COVID-19 will cause, for them, a shift to vote-by-mail, with 10
times more ballots, which makes the manual process no longer
practical&mdash;because of insufficient speed and accuracy. With
simple COTS hardware and software, we can enable 3 election staffers
to handle 50,000 vote-by-mail ballots assuming at least 4 weeks for
sending out ballots prior to election day and 2 weeks for tabulation.

## VxMail Components

> VxMail includes:

Reviewer: Given that we're so early, can we make this plain language instead of acronyms:
-a way to automatically mail ballots to voters
-a way to process incoming ballots and check signatures
-a way to scan and tabulate ballots

Author: In my opinion that makes it harder to understand and talk about, not easier. You then have to talk about it by saying "that system that counts ballots, it has..." Putting a name on things makes discussion easier.

Reviewer 2: This discussion sounds familiar. 😁

I'm conflicted about acronyms. While they may make these things easier to talk about, do they make these new systems easier for people to learn about? 

I'd support using common acronyms (SVS is the only one Google provides results for), however we should hesitate to make up new acronyms. 

Should we consider using short descriptive names instead?
| | Mail Ballot Management | Signature Verification System | Ballot Scanning System |
|-|-|-|-|
| **Option 1** | VxMailAdmin | VxBallotVerifier | VxBallotScanner |
| **Option 2** | VxMailAdmin | VxVerify | VxScan |
| **Option 3** | VxMailAdmin | VxMailVerifier | VxScan |
| **Option 4** | VxMailAdmin | VxMailVerify | VxScan |
| **Option 5** | VxPrint+Mail | VxAutograph | VxScan |
| **Option 6** | VxPrint+Mail | VxJohnHancock | VxScan |

Perhaps we don't name them right away? Perhaps we give them working names?

Author: yeah, my goal was explicitly to not name them with anything permanent, but to give them a clear consistent name *in the document* so it's easy to reference them.

I don't want to assign `Vx` names to the components yet, because it's way too soon and they may change.

Reviewer 2: Providing/using an acronym signifies that a name is common enough to require a "simpler", "easier" name.

* a Mail Ballot Management System (MBMS) to send mail ballots to voters.
* a Signature Verification System (SVS) to check signatures on incoming ballots.
* tools to efficiently open envelopes and extract ballots.
* a Ballot Scanning System (BSS) to scan and tabulate ballots.

### Ballot Printing & Mailing

VxMail includes a _Mail Ballot Management System (MBMS)_ where an
election official can:

* upload an election definition
* upload a mailing list
* proof ballots
* order ballots to be printed and mailed

> * track ballot delivery to voters.

Reviewer: Can they also track ballots voters mail back?

Author: yes, I think we'll be able to do that, good catch, will add.

All ballot printing, stuffing, and mailing is automated. Voters
receives a ballot and return envelope, including a signature box.

### Signature Verification

When ballots are received, VxMail lets election officials verify
signatures as follows:

* a state export of voter IDs and signatures is loaded into the VxMail Signature Verification System (SVS)

> * Ballot envelopes are scanned via the SVS scanner in small batches. On screen, expected and actual signatures are displayed for confirmation by election officials. If any of the batch are a non-match, SVS pauses while that ballot envelope is set aside. Scanning then continues, one small batch at a time.

Reviewer: Assuming state has lots of unreadable or missing digital signatures, can you clarify flow for how election officials manually approve signatures that may be living in paper files or elsewhere.

Author: I'd like to hear about those use cases first before trying to come up with a process. Let's see what election officials tell us!

* When all ballots have been scanned, an export of successful and unsuccessful voter IDs is generated for upload into the state voter management system to record that those voters have cast a ballot.

### Envelope Opening & Extraction

Depending on the size of the county, an off-the-shelf automated
envelope opener can be used. Alternatively, a simple envelope cutter
is most cost-effective for smaller counties.

> ### Ballot Scanning and Tabulation

Reviewer: Would be helpful to call out which components are offline and then how the tabulation is transferred to state EMS

Extracted ballots are tabulated via the VxMark Ballot Scanning System
(BSS). Three scanner models are available depending on the county size:

* small: up to 10,000 ballot pages per day, in batches of 50, each batch taking 1 minute to scan.
* medium: up to 45,000 ballot pages per day, in batches of 300, each batch taking 3 minutes to scan.
* large: up to 120,000 ballot pages per day, in batches of 500, each batch taking 3.5 minutes to scan.

The VxMark BSS then produces a set of CVRs, which can also be tabulated.

## Future Components Under Consideration

VxMail may include additional components based on the needs we hear from states and counties:

* an online absentee ballot request system to let voters request an absentee ballot.
* a mail-and-SMS-based signature cure process, where invalid signatures can be remedied efficiently.

## Cost

Our rough estimate of complete equipment system cost is:

* Small: $3,500
* Medium: $7,000
* Large: $15,000

> Plus, for ballot printing and mailing: $2.50 per voter.

Reviewer: Does $2.50 include stamp on envelope voter returns?

Author: No

# VxMail Product Spec

## Background & Motivation

> The COVID-19 pandemic presents a significant challenge to the US

Reviewer 3: "new and significant..."

> The COVID-19 pandemic presents a significant challenge to the US
> General Election of 2020. How can we safely hold elections when it may

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The COVID-19 pandemic presents a significant challenge to the 2020
General Election in the United States. How can we safely hold elections when it may
```

consensus that one important solution will be the expansion of
vote-by-mail.

Our product hypothesis is that, in states that currently have little
vote-by-mail, the small-to-medium sized counties that process no more
than 50,000 votes are likely to have the hardest time making the
necessary adjustments. Many of those counties are lightly staffed, and
many have a completely manual process for processing absentee ballot
requests, stuffing and mailing ballots out, and finally receiving,
sorting, verifying, extracting, and scanning the returned ballots. A
manual process that works for a few hundred ballots quickly falls over
for a few thousand ballots, and establishing a more automated process
in the 6 months we have left is a huge challenge for each small county
to undertake.

We propose VxMail, a set of tools to help small counties quickly scale
up their vote-by-mail capacity.

## Key Hypothesis

A number of small and some medium-sized counties have a sufficiently
manual process for a relatively small number of vote-by-mail ballots
today. COVID-19 will cause, for them, a shift to vote-by-mail, with 10
times more ballots, which makes the manual process no longer

> practical&mdash;because of insufficient speed and accuracy. With

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
practical—because of insufficient speed and accuracy. With
```

Reviewer 2: Actual UTF-8 m-dash `option shift -`

> A number of small and some medium-sized counties have a sufficiently
> manual process for a relatively small number of vote-by-mail ballots
> today. COVID-19 will cause, for them, a shift to vote-by-mail, with 10
> times more ballots, which makes the manual process no longer
> practical&mdash;because of insufficient speed and accuracy. With

Reviewer 2: Reduce number of commas.
```suggestion
Many small and medium-sized counties currently have a sufficient
manual process for a relatively small number of vote-by-mail ballots.
Due to COVID-19, these counties will see 10 times the volume of 
vote-by-mail ballots. This increase will overwhelm their current 
process due to insufficient speed and accuracy. With
```

Author: reduced commas with slightly different wording in upcoming push.

> simple COTS hardware and software, we can enable 3 election staffers

Reviewer 3: "simple, readily available off-the-shelf hardware and robust software..."
COTS isn't common

to handle 50,000 vote-by-mail ballots assuming at least 4 weeks for
sending out ballots prior to election day and 2 weeks for tabulation.

## VxMail Components

VxMail includes:
* a Mail Ballot Management System (MBMS) to send mail ballots to voters.
* a Signature Verification System (SVS) to check signatures on incoming ballots.
* tools to efficiently open envelopes and extract ballots.
* a Ballot Scanning System (BSS) to scan and tabulate ballots.

> Only the MBMS is online for connecting with print&mail services, while

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Only the MBMS is online for connecting with print and mail services, while
```

the other systems are offline for security purposes.

### Mail Ballot Management System: printing & mailing ballots

VxMail includes a _Mail Ballot Management System (MBMS)_ where an
election official can:

* upload an election definition
* upload a mailing list
* proof ballots
* order ballots to be printed and mailed
* track ballot delivery to voters.
* track ballot return from voters.

All ballot printing, stuffing, and mailing is automated. Voters
receives a ballot and return envelope, including a signature box.

> 

Reviewer 3: might be worth clarifying that 'automated' isn't actually automated, but outsourced and managed by a vendor. A clerk might want to to know a but more about where the ballots come from

### Signature Verification System

When ballots are received, VxMail lets election officials verify
signatures as follows:

> * a state export of voter IDs and signatures is loaded into the VxMail Signature Verification System (SVS)

Reviewer 3: it's not clear who loads the election file. us/ election official? This may be by design, but just calling it out

* Ballot envelopes are scanned via the SVS scanner in small batches. On screen, expected and actual signatures are displayed for confirmation by election officials. If any of the batch are a non-match, SVS pauses while that ballot envelope is set aside. Scanning then continues, one small batch at a time.
* When all ballots have been scanned, an export of successful and unsuccessful voter IDs is generated for upload into the state voter management system to record that those voters have cast a ballot.

### Envelope Opening & Extraction

Depending on the size of the county, an off-the-shelf automated

> envelope opener can be used. Alternatively, a simple envelope cutter

Reviewer 3: Clarifying: "off-the-shelf and proven automatic envelope opener and letter extractor can be used, reducing the personnel needed for opening ballots." For smaller counties, affordable automatic letter openers are available

is most cost-effective for smaller counties.

### Ballot Scanning System

Extracted ballots are tabulated via the VxMail Ballot Scanning System
(BSS). Three scanner models are available depending on the county size:

* small: up to 10,000 ballot pages per day, in batches of 50, each batch taking 1 minute to scan.
* medium: up to 45,000 ballot pages per day, in batches of 300, each batch taking 3 minutes to scan.
* large: up to 120,000 ballot pages per day, in batches of 500, each batch taking 3.5 minutes to scan.

The BSS then produces a set of CVRs, which can also be tabulated.

## Future Components Under Consideration

VxMail may include additional components based on the needs we hear from states and counties:

* an online absentee ballot request system to let voters request an absentee ballot.

> * a mail-and-SMS-based signature cure process, where invalid signatures can be remedied efficiently.

Reviewer 3: super cool!

## Cost

Our rough estimate of complete equipment system cost is:

* Small: $3,500
* Medium: $7,000
* Large: $15,000

> Plus, for ballot printing and mailing: $2.50 per voter, not including return postage.

Reviewer 2: Why not include return postage as default setup?

Author: not available right now in the options we're looking at.

Reviewer 4: Bummer.

consensus that one important solution will be the expansion of
vote-by-mail.

## Key Hypothesis

Today, many small and some medium-sized counties have a sufficiently
manual process for a relatively small number of vote-by-mail
ballots. COVID-19 will require those counties to process 10 times more
ballots, making the manual process no longer practical—because of
insufficient speed and accuracy. With simple, readily available
off-the-shelf hardware and robust software, we can enable 3 election
staffers to handle 50,000 vote-by-mail ballots assuming at least 4
weeks for sending out ballots prior to election day and 2 weeks for
tabulation.

## VxMail

We propose VxMail, a set of tools to help small counties quickly scale
up their vote-by-mail capacity.

### Components

VxMail includes:
* a Ballot Manager to send mail ballots to voters, log receipt of those ballots, and verify signatures.
* tools to efficiently open envelopes and extract ballots.
* a Ballot Tabulator to scan and tabulate ballots.

The Ballot Manager works online for connecting with print-and-mail
services, and potentially to the state's Election Management

> System. The Ballot Scanner is offline for security purposes.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
System. The Ballot Tabulator is offline for security purposes.
```

### Printing and mailing ballots

The VxMail Ballot Manager lets an election official:

* upload the election definition
* upload the voter mailing list
* proof generated ballots on screen
* order those ballots printed and mailed, with a 3-day in-USPS-hands SLA

> * track ballot delivery to voters.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
* track ballot delivery to voters
```

It's a little odd that only the last one (or two?) have periods at the end. I'd go either all or nothing.

* track ballot return from voters.

All ballot printing, stuffing, and mailing is managed by VotingWorks
and its partners, while election officials can track that process via
the Ballot Manager. Voters receives a ballot and return envelope,
including, as per best practices, a clear location to sign printed on
the return envelope.

### Verifying voter signatures

When ballots are received, election officials can verify ballot
envelope signatures using the VxMail Ballot Manager, which includes an
envelope scanner:

* An export of voter IDs and signatures, provided by the state, is

>   loaded into the VxMail Ballot Manager

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
  loaded into the VxMail Ballot Manager.
```

* Ballot envelopes are scanned into the Ballot Manager in small
  batches. On screen, expected and actual signatures are displayed for
  confirmation by election officials. If election officials detect any
  mismatch on screen, they indicate this with a single tap on the
  corresponding button, and the scanning process pauses while election
  officials locate and set aside that ballot envelope. VxMail records
  digitally that this envelope was rejected. Scanning ballot envelopes
  continues, one small batch at a time.
* When all ballots have been scanned, the VxMail Ballot Manager
  produces an export of successful and unsuccessful voter IDs,
  including digital images for both sides of the corresponding ballot

>   envelopes. These can then be upload into the state voter management

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
  envelopes. These can then be uploaded into the state voter management
```

  system to record that those voters have cast a ballot.
  
If the integration with the state's voter IDs and signature files is
not an option, election officials may instead use their existing
Election Management System and look up voter records as ballot
envelopes come in, either by scanning a voter ID barcode that appears
on the ballot return envelope, or by manually looking up the voter
record.

### Opening envelopes and extracting ballots

> Depending larger counties, VxMail includes an off-the-shelf automatic

Reviewer 4: "Depending larger counties" feels like a bad edit. Fix?

Author: yep fixing with another batch of edits. thanks!

envelope opener and letter extractor, reducing the personnel needed
for opening ballots. For smaller counties, VxMail includes an
affordable automatic letter opener.

### Scanning and tabulating ballots

> Extracted ballots are tabulated via the VxMail Tabulator, which

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Extracted ballots are tabulated via the Ballot Tabulator, which
```
